---
title: Deliberate Decks
date: 2022-02-06 17:24:00 -05:00
---

Powerpoint presentations get a bad reputation. That’s because most of them are terrible—they’re boring, they’re too long, and they’re full of tiny text and crammed with awkward animations. On the other end of the spectrum, there are the rare over-produced Keynotes from companies like Apple that have been agonized over by legions of designers to sell you on their latest technology. These seem impossible for mere mortals to put together.

So it’s no wonder that I don’t see many slide decks in my jobs on small to medium-sized software teams. And the ones I do are usually delivered by professional hypesters trying to pitch their startup, eliciting cringes from the software engineers and designers in the room (or the Zoom as the case may be). But earlier in my career as a builder, I used decks to great effect, and you know what? I miss them. In 2022, I’ve decided I’m bringing back the deck. *Deck Back Better, baby!*

When my longtime friend and collaborator Brian Capps and I worked as iOS engineers and leads at The New York Times, we noticed something interesting. There were a lot of intractable technical problems in the organization that seemed unsolvable due to politics and inter-team communication roadblocks. So, as people who cared deeply about the quality of the products we were building, we searched for any way to get product managers, designers, and business folks all on the same page about what we wanted to fix in the iOS app. The best tool we found (after trying many) was the slide deck. Here’s what we did when we really wanted something to get fixed: 

Brian and I would book a conference room together in the middle of the day, write an outline of what we wanted, and then develop a well-designed and straightforward slide presentation to make our argument. By the way, we never told our bosses we were doing any of this. Then, we’d presell the idea by showing the deck on our laptop to just a few people we know would be critical decision-makers and solicit their feedback, editing the deck as we heard their objections. Finally, we’d book a meeting with everyone in the organization who would need to be on board if we were going to make the change. 

For example, once, we wanted to make sure that the NYTimes iOS app rendered all advertisements at the proper resolution on the new retina iPhone 4. We knew we’d need a designer, the head of digital ad sales, an ad trafficker, a product manager, and an engineering lead. So we booked all of those folks into a meeting, dimmed the lights, and presented our hearts out. Everyone came out of that meeting jazzed to solve the problem, and we did! This technique worked so well that we used it repeatedly, improving the app many times along the way. Our little slideshow sideshow routine got so popular that it earned us the nickname: *The Twins*.

**Presentations are made for persuasion.** Slides make information digestible; they show that you’ve thought deeply about the problem. And the effort they take to make shows that you’re serious and that you care. You see, anyone can write an email, post a Slack message, throw together an email, or toss a meeting on the books. But few people will take the time to put together a deck.

The next time you’re trying to convince a group of folks at work who all have different priorities that the team should commit to something you want, give this a shot: **open your slideshow app of choice and make your argument in 40-point type, one slide at a time**. I bet your slides will change more minds than you suspect.