---
title: Thought Technology
date: 2021-08-04 18:36:00 -04:00
---

I was first introduced to the phrase “thought technology” by Merlin Mann and John Roderick on their long running podcast [Roderick on the Line](https://merlinmann.com/roderick). A thought technology, as they describe it, isn’t the same as a belief or a philosophy, and it’s more than just an aphorism. Thought technologies are _ways of thinking_ about particular problems or situations. They’re technologies in the sense that like a hammer or a pencil, they can be used to solve problems. Sometimes having the _right_ thought at the right time is all you need to move forward, break through, or get unstuck.

Architects and engineers be familiar with this concept as “design patterns”: reusable solutions that can be applied over and over again in the creation of complex systems like buildings or computer programs. It’s not a coincidence that Merlin has also given a talk at MacWorld about design patterns, because the two concepts do share a lot of DNA. But thought technologies are often more broadly applicable than design patterns, and can even cross disciplines and mediums.

Before I even knew the term, I heard about a deck of cards called _Oblique Strategies_ created by Brian Eno and Peter Schmidt in 1975. The original deck contained 113 cards, which each gave a suggestion of how to get unstuck on creative problems by encouraging lateral thinking. For example, “Try faking it!” or “Ask your body”.  While at first glance, these might seem like nothing more than empty aphorisms or clichés, but upon deeper inspection, they’re actually hard won lessons in creativity distilled into ink and letterpresses onto paper. They’re little gadgets for your brain to help you be a better creator.

If you’re a fan or practitioner of improvisational theatre, you have probably heard of the thought technology of “Yes and...”, but improvisers have a huge collection of these that they’ve built over decades to understand and improve their art form. Sometimes they’re referred to as rules. But one of the things I love about the word technology in this context specifically is that it’s value neutral. Just like a floppy disk or SD card, thought technologies can become outdated, outmoded, and be replaced by better more useful tools. There are no good or bad technologies, only better and worse uses of them. 

In fact, in an incredibly meta sense, even having an awareness of the concept of thought technologies is a thought technology in itself. Once you become more aware of the various mental patterns and cognitive strategies you regularly employ, it becomes much easier to name, record, and catalog them. The branch of psychology interested in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy even uses this to help treat patients with mental illness and other cognitive distortions. Once you have built up a personal library of thought technologies you employ, it becomes even easier to examine, improve, update, and replace them as you learn new things about yourself, your work, and the spaces you operate in.

Giving someone a new way to think about something that can help them solve a problem is a gift. Brian and Peter gave musicians hundreds of them in a deck of cards, improvisers hand them down through books and classes, and Merlin and John broadcast them out for free weekly in an RSS feed. As someone who’s constantly trying to learn and grow, I try to treat these gifts with the same respect I have for the physical pieces of technology I carry with me. Thanks to their show, I have a useful new way to think about thinking, and if you’ve never considered the wetware that runs on your own mental OS before today, maybe you do too. Think different, I suppose.